Initial blogpost about loading image data (#30)
dask/dask-blog: _posts/2019-06-04-loading-large-image-data-with-dask-array.md

---

> layout: widepost

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layout: post
```

I had to use widepost in the previous post just to get certain output to fit.  I think that the normal `post` layout usually looks better.

title: Exploring loading large image data with Dask Array
author: John Kirkham
draft: true
tags: [python,scipy,scikit-image,dask-image]
theme: twitter
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Series Overview
---------------

A common case in fields that acquire large amounts of imaging data is to write
out smaller acquisitions into many small files. These files can tile a larger
space, subsample from a larger time period, and may contain multiple channels.
The acquistion techniques themselves are often state of the art and constantly
pushing the envelope in term of how large a field of view can be acquired, at

> what resolution, and what quality (also known as signal-to-noise ratio).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what resolution, and what quality.
```

This is a strongly voiced first paragraph.  I recommend not ending on a parenthetical, just to keep with that strength.

process.

Historically this analytical process has involved a lot of custom code. Often
the analytical process is stitched together by a series of scripts possibly in
several different languages that write various intermediate results to disk.
Thanks to advances in modern tooling these process can be significantly
improved. In this series of blogposts, we will outline ways for image
scientists to leverage different tools to move towards a high level, friendly,
cohesive, interactive analytical pipeline.

Executive Summary
-----------------

This post explores a few simple workflows that a user might leverage to load
their image with Dask. At the end of this post users should be able to
construct a Dask Array, which they can use to further explore and manipulate
their image data.

Motivation
----------

Loading large image data can be a complex and often unique problem. Different
groups may choose to store this across many files on disk, a commodity or
custom database solution, or they may opt to store it in the cloud. Not all
datasets within the same group may be treated the same for a variety of
reasons. In short, this means loading data is a hard and expensive problem.

> Despite data being stored in different ways, often group want to reapply the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite data being stored in many different ways, often groups want to reapply the
```

same analytical pipeline to these datasets. However if the data pipeline is
tightly coupled to a particular way of loading the data for later analytical
steps, it may be very difficult if not impossible to reuse an existing
pipeline. In other words, there is friction between the loading and analysis
steps, which frustrates efforts to make things reusable.

Having a modular and general way to load data makes it easy to present data
stored differently in a standard way. Further having a standard way to present
data to analytical pipelines allows that part of the pipeline to focus on what
it does best, analysis! In general, this should decouple these to components in
a way that improves the experience of users involved in all parts of the

> pipeline.

Reviewer: I think that we probably need to reduce the exposition leading this post.  There are seven paragraphs of solid text before we get to non-text details like code, a table of results, or an image.  My experience is that most readers have a shorter attention span than this.

Some ideas:

1.  Drop the Series Overview section for now.  We can add something later after we have a series.
2.  Cut verbosity

    > Before: This post explores a few simple workflows that a user might leverage to load
their image with Dask.

    > After: We load image data with Dask.  
3.  Include a teaser code sample pretty much immediately afterwards in a "this is where we're going" comment, just so readers have a reason to stick around.

Author: Thanks for the feedback here.

1. I'd like to keep the series overview at least in this post as it will be the first one.
2. It probably has a fair bit of room for cutting (I have a tendency to be a bit verbose).
3. Happy to break this up with more code, pictures, diagrams, etc.

Reviewer: > I'd like to keep the series overview at least in this post as it will be the first one.

My experience with this is that I only finish about half of the blogpost series that I intend to write.  Other things get in the way.  I understand leaving this in if you're going to add more posts with high probability within a week or two.  Our timeline doesn't seem to be this fast or this predictable though, so I recommend leaving it off until we actually have a series.  Even then, I would reduce the series summary to a few sentences followed by a bulleted list of posts in the series.

Loading image data with Dask
----------------------------

> A pretty typical case to see is a large directory of image files. In particular

Reviewer: Totally subjective, but I enjoy removing filler text.  I'll provide this suggestion as an example to encourage thought, but it's not a big deal.

```suggestion
A typical case is a large directory of image files. In particular,
```

Author: Sure I'll give this another look to fix text like this. Thanks!

TIFF files are quite common, though other formats could show up as well. It is
common to see a naming structure that mirrors that shown below. The `<i>`
represent different numbers.

```
mydata_ch<i>_<j>t_<k>x_<l>y_<m>z.tif

> ```

Reviewer: I would be interested to know what common meanings for these are, perhaps a list like 

-  x, y, and z coordinates in space
-  A coordinate in time
-  Sample number
-  Channel, like red, blue, green if operating with optical light
-  ...

Author: Have added some description of these parameters above. Feel free to take a look. Though I probably wouldn't get too focused on details here as this will almost certainly vary across datasets.

> To load a single one of these a user might right some code like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To load a single image, a user might write some code like the following:
```

```python
from skimage.io import imread
a = imread("mydata_ch<i>_<j>t_<k>x_<l>y_<m>z.tif")
```

While this works fine for reading a single image into memory, this will quickly
become prohibitive once we try to load more data than we have memory. So we
might replace this with something like this.

```python
from dask.array.image import imread
a = imread("mydata_ch<i>_<j>t_<k>x_<l>y_<m>z.tif")

> ```

Reviewer: Thoughts on starting with dask delayed instead?

Author: Yep, we could do that. Should we keep this code or merely reference it in text?

Author: I've added some code before this showing delayed. Have also reworked this section to match [this outline]( https://github.com/dask/dask-blog/pull/30#discussion_r292674949 ).

Reviewer: If we have uniform shapes and dtypes then I think that there is a more effective pattern than what is shown above. 

```python
sample = skimage.io.imread(filenames[0])
```

Show output of single sample image

One sentence about how we can now lazily read in all of the files as lazy single-block dask arrays, using the sample as a pattern.

```python
arrays = [da.from_delayed(dask.delayed(skimage.io.imread)(fn), shape=sample.shape, dtype=sample.dtype) for fn in filenames]
```

One or two sentences about how we can then concatenate or stack these arrays into a larger dask array, followed by tiny code examples with da.concatenate and da.stack and their visualized shapes

(shape and type of the array loaded) and then drop it from memory. Once we
actually need this data for computation of some kind, it will be loaded back
in.

Though it's possible we run into data that we want to load that scikit-image
doesn't know to handle. In this case we have a few options. Though one pretty
easy one is we could supply our own [`imread` function for Dask to use](
https://docs.dask.org/en/latest/array-api.html#dask.array.image.imread ). This
way we could manage the subtleties of loading our own data image data format.
It might involve accessing some database to pull some image data out or could
involve interacting with cloud storage to pull some data down.

Thus far we have only showed how one might load one chunk. To load multiple
chunks we would need to iterate over our data some how and combine the chunks
together. Suppose we have one dimension to combine chunks along, we might write
some code that looks like that below. We would load all of the chunks of data
we have join them together with Dask Array's `block` to form a larger array. We
can easily extend this to more dimensions.

```python
data = []
for fn in files:

>     data.append(dask.array.imread(fn))

Reviewer: Are we reading each image here to get the shape and dtype?  I would expect this to become prohibitively expensive.  

When I do this I tend to do the following:

```python
sample = skimage.io.imread(fn)

data = [dask.delayed(skimage.io.imread)(fn) for fn in filenames]
data = [da.from_array(x, shape=sample.shape, dtype=sample.dtype) for x in data]
```

Author: Currently, yes. We could certainly change that. Though I regularly encountered use cases before when the image files did not necessarily have the same size.

Perhaps we could say, "if we know the image files to be uniform, we could inspect one for metadata and apply this to the rest like so."

Should add this is one of the things that should be in future work. In particular having a fast way to determine the metadata without reading the full image file into memory. Maybe we should hint at that here. Under the hood dask-image's `imread` does this and its quite fast, but doesn't handle all image file types.

xref: https://github.com/imageio/imageio/issues/382
xref: https://github.com/imageio/imageio/issues/362
xref: https://github.com/imageio/imageio/issues/263

Author: Any follow-up here, @mrocklin?

Reviewer: > Perhaps we could say, "if we know the image files to be uniform, we could inspect one for metadata and apply this to the rest like so."

Sounds good to me.

> Under the hood dask-image's imread does this and its quite fast, but doesn't handle all image file types.

Ah, I assumed thhat it would be reading all of the data.  If it's fast, then great.  

I still think that I have a slight preference for delayed just because it's a bit more generalizable and explicit, but whatever works.

> 
```suggestion
    data.append(dask.array.imread(fn))
```

Author: Ok, I'll give that a go.

Yeah dask-image's reader is fast, but `dask.array`s is not. We could change that in the example. I think I noted this in "Future Work" currently, but we could replace that.

Sure one thought on the progression might be...

1. Load file with `skimage.io.imread`.
2. Note this won't scale to all of our data.
3. Show example with `delayed`.
4. We can brush this under the rug with dask-image's `imread`.

Does that seem reasonable?

Side note: The suggested change doesn't seem to have anything in the diff?

Reviewer: Yeah, that sounds great.   We're explicit so readers can generalize, but also point to the existence  of an automatic solution so that users know where to investigate further.

Author: Ok, I've actually done this above with loading a single image and just changed the code here to use `imread`.

> data = dask.array.block(data)

Reviewer: I think that `dask.array.block` could use some explanation here.  We might also want to mention `dask.array.concatenate` and `dask.array.stack`.  This might also be a good opportunity to use the `_repr_html_` work, which, fortunately for us, generates HTML that we can plop into this post.

Reviewer: (this is probably my most major comment)

One way to structure this post might be as follows:

1.  We got a bunch of interesting looking data from a leading edge microscopist.  Look at this cool image of the data as rendered nicely in 3d (cool image from IndeX)
2.  But!  Before we can analyze this data, we have to get it out of a bunch of TIFF files.  Gross! (truncated output of calling `ls`)
3.  This is actually pretty typical (now that we've hooked the reader, we can add some exposition about imaging data and tiff files and why this is the state of things.  They got a little endorphin boost from the image so we can throw some text at them now)
4.  So lets load this data with NumPy for analysis.  We would normally use scikit-image
5.  But our data is too big!  (maybe some `du -hs` call here on a stack of real image data, like Gokul's)
6.  So we can use Dask arrays to wrap around many TIFF files
7.  Example with dask delayed and da.from_delayed
8.  Now we have this list of lazy single-chunked arrays.  How do we want to combine those together?  Look at da.concatenate and da.stack, perhaps using the `_repr_html_` output (which I think could be very neat!)
9.  But in our case it's actually way more complex than this, because we don't have just one axis along which we want to concatenate/stack things.  This brings us to `dask.array.block`, where we place our delayed images into an array.
10.  Our actual code here looked like this (copy from your existing notebook)
11.  This is kind of gross, but the grossness here reflects the grossness of the layout.  What's nice is that once we do this, we have a nice clean dask array to work from
12.  Now that we've done this, lets write out to an analysis ready format like Zarr.  You can read more about Zarr here ...
13.  We'll pick up from here next time!

Reviewer: Any thoughts on this layout @jakirkham ?

Author: Thanks for writing this up.

Sorry for being slow. Yeah I have been thinking about this and am still thinking about it.

It's an interesting approach and I can certainly see the appeal. From a high level it seems generally reasonable. Some of the details we may still need to sort out.

I'm still trying to figure out how we can leverage as much of the existing text as possible here while moving towards this structure. So have been working through some of the smaller comments that move in this direction.

Will try to restructure things a bit more based on this feedback and then we can see where things stand.

Author: Also on the `concatenate`, `stack`, `block` progression, I've added some text and code along these lines. Could use a look when you have a chance.

pushing the envelope in term of how large a field of view can be acquired, at
what resolution, and what quality.

Once acquired this data presents a number of challenges. Algorithms often
designed and tested to work on very small pieces of this data need to be scaled
up to work on the full dataset. It might not be clear at the outset what will
actually work and so exploration still plays a very big part of the whole
process.

Historically this analytical process has involved a lot of custom code. Often
the analytical process is stitched together by a series of scripts possibly in
several different languages that write various intermediate results to disk.
Thanks to advances in modern tooling these process can be significantly
improved. In this series of blogposts, we will outline ways for image
scientists to leverage different tools to move towards a high level, friendly,
cohesive, interactive analytical pipeline.

Executive Summary
-----------------

This post explores a few simple workflows that a user might leverage to load
their image with Dask. At the end of this post users should be able to
construct a Dask Array, which they can use to further explore and manipulate

> their image data.

Reviewer: I recommend placing this at the beginning of the post, before the series overview.

Many blogpost visits are less than 10s long.  You need to hook them in those 10s.  If you don't then they leave.  I recommend having this summary, plus an exciting image on the screen when they first load the page.
